whonixcheck(1) -- checks anonymity and security status in Whonix
=============================================

<span class="comment">
# Copyright (C) 2012 - 2020 ENCRYPTED SUPPORT LP <adrelanos@riseup.net>
# See the file COPYING for copying conditions.
</span>

## SYNOPSIS
`whonixcheck` [options]

## DESCRIPTION
Whonixcheck is a tool, which checks the state of many aspects of Whonix, which
is important for providing anonymity and security.

## EXTENDED DESCRIPTION
Checks if,

* Your network connection is functional.
* You are connected to Tor.

Shows,

* Your external IP address(es).
* Installed Tor Browser version. (Only on Whonix-Workstation)
* Latest Tor Browser version. (Only on Whonix-Workstation)
* Available operating system updates.
* Installed Whonix version.
* Latest Whonix version.
* Important Whonix News.

Downloads,

* Whonix Important Blog. (Only on Whonix-Workstation)
* Whonix Feature Blog. (Only on Whonix-Workstation)

This script,

* Will break, if https://check.torproject.org is down or content of that page is changed.
* Will break, if http://sourceforge.net/projects/whonixdevelopermetafiles/files/internal/news/ is down.
* Works in command line interface and under X Window System.

## OPTIONS

  * -v, --verbose

    Verbose output. Outputs results from tests that succeeded, that would
    otherwise only complain if there was an issue.

  * -e, --debug

    Debug output. Enables xtrace and enables curl output.
<span class="comment">
https://github.com/Whonix/Whonix/issues/24

  * --pin-tpo-cert

    Enable pinning of torproject.org SSL certificate.

  * --no-pin-tpo-cert

    Disable pinning of torproject.org SSL certificate. (Default.)
    Disabled by default, because experimental and because maintenance burden too
    high. See also: https://www.whonix.org/wiki/Whonixcheck#SSL_Certificate_Pinning

  * --leak-tests

    Run Tor leak tests.

  * --show-ip

    Show IP during Tor leak tests.

  * --gui

    Deactivates output auto detection. Enables gui output.

  * --cli

    Deactivates output auto detection. Enables cli output.
</span>

## EXIT CODES
0 Success

1 Error

2 Warning

143 Signal sigterm received.

130 Signal sigint received.

## EXAMPLE
`whonixcheck`

`whonixcheck -v`

## Configuration File and Folder

See /etc/whonix.d/30_whonixcheck_default.conf

## WWW
https://www.whonix.org/wiki/Whonixcheck

## AUTHOR
This man page has been written by Patrick Schleizer (adrelanos@riseup.net).
